---
title: Using Google less

draft: false

page : false

---
I've been a faithful user of Google services for a long time. Search, Gmail,
Calendar, Drive, Photos, Translation, Chrome, Maps, etc. I've used a lot of
them. They provide a good user experience and are deeply integrated into one
another. Also, they are free or at least very cheap (I was paying 2â‚¬/month for
extra storage).

Google became *my personnal platform*. Growing up and learning how to use
Internet I end up thinking that this was *the way* to use it. Does it sound
familiar?

But, years go by and I learnt more and more about fondamental issues with Google
(and others). You probably have heard of them too.

I'm not OK with the social and political impact[^1] of platforms like Google and
what they do to privacy[^2]. I'm not OK with giving Google a significant part of
my life while they can abruptly shut down down my account[^3]. I'm not OK with
their "ethics"[^4].

How can we be alarmed about these issues and still use Google's services
personnaly? And still *pay* them?

Living with this paradox became harder and harder. It's no surprise that I woke
up one morning a few weeks ago and said to my self: "I should stop using
Google".

Now in the middle of my ["DeGoogle"](https://www.reddit.com/r/degoogle) process,
it's a good time to share my plan. I hope it can inspire you. It's also a way to
force myself to continue on this not-so-easy path. Now that you've read that I'm
doing this it's harder for me to turn back.

Don't get me wrong. I still find Google products very powerfull. I will
certainly miss a lot of them.

But it's time to take control back.

# The plan 

My plan starts with two important axioms.

**I have a computer-science background and want to leverage it.** This will be a
bit hacky. That's OK. This is not a mainstrem tutorial. I want to learn a bit of
the fondamentals behind the everyday tools.

I will also use this opportunity to use more free and opensource software.
Probably not GUIs but CLIs and terminal stuff a lot. After all I'm a heavy
VIM user: if I can use VIM to write mail I will be a happy man.

This choice will maybe also help me switch from macOS to Linux more easily one
day.

**I have a simple setup: One computer. One smartphone.** Nothing more.

I use the same computer for personnal and work stuff. I also use an iPhone,
mainly to read stuff (messages, calendar, etc.), not more.

This will help me choose the Google alternatives that fit my needs.

---

[^1]: See on this subject the documentary
    [The Social Dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Social_Dilemma) by
    Jeff Orlowski, ironically available on Netflix.

[^2]: There is a short TED Talk by Gleen Greenwald,
    [Why privacy matters](https://www.ted.com/talks/glenn_greenwald_why_privacy_matters)
    that explains the danger of thinking "I've nothing to hide, so I see no
    problem in using services that make me loose my privacy".

[^3]: You don't have to be a "bad person" for Google to
    [shut down your account](https://www.reddit.com/r/google/comments/6sqgip/google_shuts_down_my_account_after_10_years_of).
    All you have to do after all is doing something that can be interpreted as
    against their terms of service.

[^4]: Just a few days ago they fired [Timnit Gebru](https://www.theverge.com/2020/12/5/22155985/paper-timnit-gebru-fired-google-large-language-models-search-ai)
    from Google AI ethics team and have been accused again of [having spied on
    workers before firing them](https://www.theverge.com/2020/12/2/22047383/google-spied-workers-before-firing-labor-complaint).
