---
title: Design System and Crazyness

draft: false

page : false

image: /assets/img/design-system-schizophrenia-diagram.png

excerpt: "Discussing the cost of the status quo of promoting a Design System but
but organizing the company for it"

---

Last week my ex-colleague and friend [Benoit Rajalu](https://www.benrajalu.net/)
shared a post called "Is it really a design system?" in which he lists the
different reasons why the shiny project you call a "Design System" maybe isn't
really one, but just a collection of bad components.

You're *not* building a Design System when designers and developers are not
using the same language and components, when you have no documentation except a
Storybook or few comments on a Figma file, when designers reinvent the wheel in
each project and developers code single-use ultra-specific components. You're
most certainly not building a Design System when there is all that and nothing
is attempted to fix it.

And I strongly agree with this.

I formulated a strong opinion on the situation thanks to the powerful schema his
article ends with.

![A diagram showing on one side an opposition between code and design, and on
the other a cycle between features and a Design
System](/assets/img/design-system-schizophrenia-diagram.png)

It shows that setting-up a Design System for your organization means switching
from the traditional "designers vs developers" mindset (left) to a Product
mindset (right).

The target is to have a *team* that owns a *product* (the DS and its artifacts).
A product that has *customers* (your other teams).

I have to admit that I am not seeing a lot of Design System *teams* in companies
so far. I see Design System *projects*, for sure. It's very trendy these days.
They are mainly driven by the base of the organization, ie. some designers
and/or developers. They work on it on weekends. They come early in the morning
or they leave late at night to work for the project without slowing down
production for their "real" job, shipping features.

The organization's leadership may eventually enter the game, especially if the
project begins to see some traction (as it will because, turns out, it's a
powerful concept) and if the initial volunteers haven't burned out yet.
Leadership declares: "We have a Design System! It's so good! Thanks so and so".
A quick mention of it is made in a blog post or a corporate presentation,
showing the world how their Design System revolutionized the company.
Meanwhile, nothing has actually changed inside.

Nothing has changed because the leadership has not embraced that a Design System
is a product, and nurturing a product requires a dedicated team.

Is such a thing a pipe dream? It should not be, we are already used to this
paradigm in our engineering departments. We have infrastructure or platform
teams that cater to the other units, providing a solid platform to run their
services. We have engineering productivity teams that help others with day to
day tools (CI, testing environment, etc.). We have analysts and UX researchers
to support the decision-making of other teams with bespoke data. They are all
"in-house" services teams.

Organizations willingly invest in all of those teams but can't form one for the
Design System? What's the problem?

Is it the idea of mixing designers and developers together as one unit? How is
it different from what we do for feature teams, squads, swarms or whatever name
you give to multidisciplinary teams, those working on features?

Is it an org chart issue? Where it's unclear whether such a team reports to the
VP of Product or to the VP of Engineering? Why would that matter? Aren't they
both after the same ultimate company goal?

Is it because designers or developers are already understaffed? Well shoot,
that's precisely when a dedicated team would help: with a Design System they
will do more with less.

Is it because nobody is here to lead this team? What about those who have
managed to build the current Design System and do their day to day job *at the
same time*? Aren't they leadership enough?

Is it because you don't believe in investing in such low levels teams for the
benefit of the rest of the organization? Then why keep talking about a Design
System, and why keep investing in infrastructure teams, UX researchers and so on
if you're against such an idea?

All this questioning leads only to one conclusion: wanting to produce a Design
System without updating your organization to support it will make your designers
and developers go crazy.

They have to work for their team's projects on the roadmap *while* fighting with
management over time budgets for Design System tasks. These are never the
priority and the global roadmap has never enough room for them. But both
designers and developers see their benefits, so they keep trying, and trying,
and trying.

They end up giving 100% for the Design System (because, you know, such a project
is not an easy task) *while* they're asked to keep giving 100% on their
regularly-scheduled features, knowing such a pace always ends poorly (yes,
burnout. Or wry cynicism in the best of cases, go ask Benoit). 

They are often put in acrimonious situations with other colleagues *while*
continuing to work with them on their features. This is unavoidable. The
situation doesn't actually make sense to anyone. The people invested in the
Design System will of course fight for it. Those who aren't as invested are
faced with an unsanctioned, "bottom-up" project, and some will therefore have no
issue undermining that project. If it were so important, a team would have been
formed around it, right? Right. 

They are left with two very opposite missions: they must keep focusing on the
specific needs of their individual teams *while simultaneously* creating a
product, one that preaches the need to cater collaboratively to the necessities
of every team. In the same work day, they may be tasked with creating design or
code in complete opposition with the goal of the System they defend.

They also lack the proper communication structures. Nobody listens to them.
Nobody considers their requests. Nobody respects the rules the Design System
comes with because they have no authority. Their product has not been
sanctioned, it is not materialized by a single, identifiable core team. It's
just a bunch of people being mad at the void.

They are mad because they have to work in constant questioning, constant
tradeoff. They have to manage all those contradictions and conflicts by
themselves, not being afforded the same support and leadership other "in-house
services" teams have been given.

They're going completely crazy.

By wanting the company to produce a Design System without organizing around and
for it, we chart a clear path to craziness. After all, it is exactly to prevent
that that we usually create new teams with clear responsibilities. It's for
people to work efficiently towards one team goal. For conflicts and
contradictions to be resolved by teams speaking to each others, not by poisoning
everyone's mind.

I'm not saying it's impossible to build a real Design System relying only on a
few charitable souls spread across teams. There are certainly successful
examples.

However, it certainly is the hardest path. If the benefits of the Design System
come without change on your organization's part, without a dedicated team,
supportive leadership, ressources, time and headcount, then you can trust the
cost is being paid by the employees. At the cost of their sanity, or their
trust, or their motivation.

---

Thanks to Benoit Rajalu for helping me with drafts of this!
